Adding objects: mdb-add (in construction)
=========================================

Sequence and collections can be created in the database using the ``mdb-add`` command-line tool, together with a file in CSV or JSON format that describes these objects.

The syntax is the following::

	Usage: mdb-add [options]
	
	Part of the MetagenomeDB toolkit. Import objects (Sequence and/or Collection)
	into the database. Those objects are provided as JSON- or CSV-formatted
	descriptions.
	
	Options:
	  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
	  -i FILENAME, --input=FILENAME
	                        Name of the file containing a description of the
	                        objects to import, or '-' to read from the standard
	                        input (mandatory).
	  -f STRING, --format=STRING
	                        Format of the input file, either 'json' or 'csv'
	                        (optional). Default: csv
	  --ignore-duplicates   If set, ignore duplicate objects errors.
	  --ignore-missing      If set, ignore relationships that refer to missing
	                        objects.
	  -v, --verbose         
	  --dry-run             
	
	  Connection:
	    --host=HOSTNAME     Host name or IP address of the MongoDB server
	                        (optional). Default: localhost
	    --port=INTEGER      Port of the MongoDB server (optional). Default: 27017
	    --db=STRING         Name of the database in the MongoDB server (optional).
	                        Default: 'MetagenomeDB'
	    --user=STRING       User for the MongoDB server connection (optional).
	                        Default: ''
	    --password=STRING   Password for the MongoDB server connection (optional).
	                        Default: ''

The description file
--------------------

``mdb-add`` relies on an external file you must provide, which contains a description of the sequences and/or collections to create. This file can be in either `JSON <http://www.json.org/>`_ or `CSV <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comma-separated_values>`_ format.

CSV format
..........

A CSV file can be generated by any spreadsheet software that supports this format; examples are `Microsoft Excel <http://office.microsoft.com/en-us/excel/>`_, `OpenOffice <http://www.openoffice.org/>`_ or `Numbers <http://www.apple.com/iwork/numbers/>`_.

Each line of this file will describe one object, or describe the relationship between two objects (see :doc:`../api/relationships`). Each cell of a given line will describe one property of this object. For example,

================  ==============  =================  ===============
A                 B               C                  D
================  ==============  =================  ===============
_type=collection  name=Sample #1  year=2011^integer  month=1^integer
================  ==============  =================  ===============

will create a :doc:`../api/collection` with name "Sample #1", year 2011 and month 1. Let's describe this format:

- each cell must contain a property name followed by an equal sign ('=') then the value for this property. Any space before or after the equal sign, or after the value will be ignored; e.g., ``property=value`` is similar to ``property = value``.
- the value is, by default, interpreted as a string. If you want to provide another type of value (such as an integer for the year or month in our example), you must use a *modifier* after a caret sign ('^'). Accepted modifiers are *integer*, *float*, and *boolean*. E.g., ``a=true^boolean`` will store the boolean ``true`` into a property 'a'.
- a property can receive a *list* of values, by using a comma to separate them and by adding a square bracket ('[') after the caret sign; e.g., ``a=1,2^[integer`` will store the list of integers 1, 2 into the property 'a'. If some of the values are strings that contain commas, you must quote them. E.g., ``a="foo,bar","hello"`` will store the two strings "foo,bar" and "hello" into a property 'a'. Note that a list of strings doesn't require a ``^[string`` modifier.
- more than one value type can be provided after the caret sign. This is useful when you generate your CSV file programmatically and do not know in advance what a value will be. E.g., ``a=x^integer,string`` will store the value ``x`` as an integer if possible, and as a string if not.
- empty lines or lines starting with a '#' sign will be ignored.

Here are some examples:

====================  =====================
Definition            Result
====================  =====================
``5^integer``         integer 3
``3,4^[integer``      list of integers 3, 4
``3.4^float``         float 3.4
``1^integer,string``  integer 1
``a^integer,string``  string "a"
``true^boolean``      boolean true
====================  =====================

There are two additional notes:

- a special property ``_type`` must be provided for each object (sequence, collection or relationship between them), with value 'sequence', 'collection' or 'relationship' (case insensitive). This is needed for ``mdb-add`` to know the type of object you want to create
- the property ``name`` is mandatory when creating sequences and collections. When creating a sequence, a ``sequence`` property is also requested. See :doc:`../api/sequence` and :doc:`../api/collection` documentation.

Creating a relationship between two objects require some other properties, namely ``_source`` and ``_target``, to describe the source and target of the relationship, respectively (see :doc:`../api/relationships`). Hence, let us imagine the three following objects (two collections and one sequence):

_type=collection name=Collection A
_type=collection name=Collection B
_type=sequence

JSON format
...........

To do.

Using the description file
--------------------------

Once your description file created, adding those objects to the database require the following command::

	$ mdb-add -i [description filename]

By default ``mdb-add`` will expect a CSV-formatted file. If you provide a JSON you must tell it so by using the ``-f|--format`` option::

	$ mdb-add -i [JSON file] -f son

By default ``mdb-add`` will display an error and stop the processing of your description file in any of the two following cases:

- an object that is defined in the description file already exists in the database
- a relationship that is defined in the description file refers to a source or a target that doesn't exist in the database

You can override this behavior by using the ``--ignore-duplicates`` and ``--ignore-missing`` options, respectively.

.. toctree::
	:hidden:
